Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) refers to cancers that are low in expression of the estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). TNBC tends to behave more aggressively than other types of breast cancer. Unlike other breast cancer subtypes (ie, ER-positive, HER2-positive subtypes), there are no approved targeted treatments available, other than the administration of chemotherapy. Immunotherapy is a new kind of treatment approach for TNBC when compared with the surgical treatment, chemotherapy, endocrine therapy, and molecular targeting therapy. The present article reviews the research progresses of immunotherapy for TNBC in recent years. The full text structure covers molecular classification of TNBC, active immunotherapy of TNBC, passive immunotherapy of TNBC, oncolytic immunotherapy and the prospect of immunotherapy for TNBC.
Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), characterized by lack of estrogen receptors, progesterone hormone receptors, and HER2 overexpression, is a more aggressive high grade tumor and not sensitive to current targeted drugs. The clinical prognosis of TNBC is poorer than other types of breast cancer, and there is no effective therapy strategy until now. Thus, it is necessary to determine important factors involved in regulating the progression of TNBC. In this study, we found DEPDC1 was up-regulated in the tissues of TNBC compared with their paired peritumoral tissues. DEPDC1 over-expression facilitated cell proliferation and tumor growth through increasing the expression of FOXM1 in TNBC cells. Conversely, knockdown of DEPDC1 had the opposite effects. Moreover, miR-26b, acting as a tumor suppressor in TNBC, directly repressed the expression of DEPDC1 and mitigated its promotive effects on cell growth and colony formation. These results indicate that DEPDC1, negatively regulated by miR-26b, promotes cell proliferation and tumor growth via up-regulating FOXM1 expression, implying an important underlying mechanism of regulating the progression of TNBC.
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is the most malignant type of breast cancer with ample vascularisation and high vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression. The sex steroid hormone oestrogen is involved in several cellular activities associated with TNBC regulation. However, the role of oestrogen in VEGF expression and angiogenesis in TNBC remains unclear. In this study, we found that treatment with 17β-oestradiol (E2) inhibited VEGF mRNA and protein expression in the TNBC cell lines MDA-MB-468 and MDA-MB-436. To further elaborate on the phenomenon of E2-regulated angiogenesis, we showed that conditioned medium from the TNBC cell line MDA-MB-468 treated with E2 inhibits the tube formation ability of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). Additionally, the G-protein-coupled oestrogen receptor-1 (GPER-1)-specific agonist G-1 has a function similar to that of E2. While G-15, the selective antagonist of GPER-1, notably reversed the inhibitory effects of E2 and G-1 on VEGF expression and tube formation, suggesting that GPER-1 is involved in the E2-induced angiogenesis suppression in TNBC cells. Moreover, E2 inhibited in vivo tumour growth and angiogenesis and reduced the expression levels of VEGF, NF-κB/p65, STAT3, and the endothelial marker CD34 in MDA-MB-468 xenograft tumours. Our findings provide important evidence that E2 can inhibit VEGF expression and angiogenesis in TNBC by activating GPER-1, offering additional insight into tumour angiogenesis and targets for drug intervention in TNBC.
Monocarboxylate transporter 1 (MCT1), also known as a L-lactate transporter, is a potential therapeutic target in cancer. The objectives of this study were to evaluate efficacy and assess concentration-effect relationships of AR-C155858 (a selective and potent MCT1 inhibitor) in murine 4T1 breast cancer cells and in the 4T1 tumor xenograft model. Western blotting of 4T1 cells demonstrated triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) characteristics and overexpression of MCT1 and CD147 (a MCT1 accessory protein), but absence of MCT4 expression. AR-C155858 inhibited the cellular L-lactate uptake and cellular proliferation at low nanomolar potencies (IC50 values of 25.0 ± 4.2 and 20.2 ± 0.2 nM, respectively). In the xenograft 4T1 mouse model of immunocompetent animals, AR-C155858 (10 mg/kg i.p. once daily) had no effect on tumor volume and weight. Treatment with AR-C155858 resulted in slightly increased tumor lactate concentrations; however, the changes were not statistically significant. AR-C155858 was well tolerated, as demonstrated by the unchanged body weight and blood lactate concentrations. Average blood and tumor AR-C155858 concentrations (110 ± 22 and 574 ± 245 nM, respectively), 24 h after the last dose, were well above the IC50 values. These data indicate that AR-C155858 penetrated 4T1 xenograft tumors and was present at high concentrations but was ineffective in decreasing tumor growth. Evaluations of AR-C155858 in other preclinical models of breast cancer are needed to further assess its efficacy.
Suppression of axillary lymph node metastasis (ALNM) is an important goal in the treatment of breast cancer. While several therapies directed to ALNM have been evaluated, effective and safe treatments for ALNM in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) have not been established yet, especially against initial/small metastases. Here, we demonstrated the therapeutic effect of an anthracycline drug, epirubicin (EPI)-loaded polymeric micelles equipped with pH-triggered drug release property (EPI/m) against ALNM of TNBC. EPI/m effectively inhibited the spread of the primary tumor and the growth of ALNM, through selective accumulation and penetration in both primary tumor and vascularized ALNM, as well as efficient drug activation triggered by the intratumoral acidic environment. Furthermore, we revealed that the improvement of the activated drug distribution of EPI/m contributed to dose-dependent enhancement of the antitumor effect through expansion of the therapeutic window. These findings highlight the utility of pH-responsive property in EPI/m for the treatment of ALNM in TNBC.
Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease consisting of several subtypes. Among these subtypes, triple negative breast cancer is particularly difficult to treat. This is due to a lack of understanding of the mechanisms behind the disease, and consequently a lack of druggable targets. PAK4 plays critical roles in cell survival, proliferation, and morphology. PAK4 protein levels are high in breast cancer cells and breast tumors, and the gene is often amplified in basal like breast cancers, which are frequently triple negative. PAK4 is also overexpressed in other types of cancer, making it a promising drug target. However, its inhibition is complicated by the fact that PAK4 has both kinase-dependent and -independent functions. Here we investigate a new clinical compound KPT-9274, which has been shown to inhibit PAK4 and NAMPT. We find that KPT-9274 (and its analog, KPT-8752) can reduce the steady state level of PAK4 protein in triple negative breast cancer cells. These compounds also block the growth of the breast cancer cells in vitro, and stimulate apoptosis. Most importantly, oral administration of KPT-9274 reduces tumorigenesis in mouse models of human triple negative breast cancer. Our results indicate that KPT-9274 is a novel therapeutic option for triple negative breast cancer therapy.
This Review assesses the relevant data and controversies regarding the use of radiotherapy for, and locoregional management of, women with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). In view of the strong association between BRCA1 and TNBC, knowledge of baseline mutation status can be useful to guide locoregional treatment decisions. TNBC is not a contraindication for breast conservation therapy because data suggest increased locoregional recurrence risks (relative to luminal subtypes) with breast conservation therapy or mastectomy. Although a boost to the tumour bed should routinely be considered after whole breast radiation therapy, TNBC should not be the sole indication for post-mastectomy radiation, and accelerated delivery methods for TNBC should be offered on clinical trials. Preliminary data implying a relative radioresistance for TNBC do not imply radiation omission because radiation provides an absolute locoregional risk reduction. At present, the integration of subtypes in locoregional management decisions is still in its infancy. Until level 1 data supporting treatment decisions based on subtypes are available, standard locoregional management principles should be adhered to.
Graphical abstract Although accounting for merely a minute portion of diagnosed breast cancers, disproportionate number of deaths and associated low survival rate of patients have made triple-negative breast cancer to be considered as the most lethal breast cancer subtype. More importantly, intrinsic or developed resistance to chemotherapeutic regimens and disappointing outcomes of trials associated with many newly developed agents are other obstacles in establishment of a durable response in these patients. Interestingly, these happen despite the outstanding preclinical outcomes observed by these agents, most importantly among them, targeted receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Pursuing these disappointing outcomes, especially in the case of targeted receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors, many researches have focused on identification of the hidden factors involved. Highly inflammatory, rich in reactive oxygen species, and hypoxic microenvironment of triple-negative breast cancer tumors and the involving mediators were the first suggestions for observed resistance and poor clinical outcomes of targeted receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Interestingly, for all aberrantly expressed mediators observed in microenvironment, downstream pathways converge in a common node, nothing but the nuclear factor-κB, the insidious factor proposed to be the cause of many events opposing achievement of a desired outcome. In first section of current review, we describe the signaling pathways underlying activation of receptor tyrosine kinases and their convergence at the nuclear factor-κB node, and in next section, we demonstrate how unique hypoxic, inflammatory, rich in free-radical microenvironment of triple-negative breast cancer exacerbate pathways in which otherwise could become mostly suppressed by receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
Cancer has been considered as temporal and spatial aberrations of normal development in tissues. Similarities between mammary embryonic development and cell transformation suggest that the underlying processes required for mammary gland development are also those perturbed during various stages of mammary tumorigenesis and breast cancer (BC) development. The master regulators of embryonic development Cripto-1, Notch/CSL, and Wnt/β-catenin play key roles in modulating mammary gland morphogenesis and cell fate specification in the embryo through fetal mammary stem cells (fMaSC) and in the adult organism particularly within the adult mammary stem cells (aMaSC), which determine mammary progenitor cell lineages that generate the basal/myoepithelial and luminal compartments of the adult mammary gland. Together with recognized transcription factors and embryonic stem cell markers, these embryonic regulatory molecules can be inappropriately augmented during tumorigenesis to support the tumor-initiating cell (TIC)/cancer stem cell (CSC) compartment, and the effects of their deregulation may contribute for the etiology of BC, in particular the most aggressive subtype of BC, triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). This in depth review will present evidence of the involvement of Cripto-1, Notch/CSL, and Wnt/β-catenin in the normal mammary gland morphogenesis and tumorigenesis, from fMaSC/aMaSC regulation to TIC generation and maintenance in TNBC. Specific therapies for treating TNBC by targeting these embryonic pathways in TICs will be further discussed, providing new opportunities to destroy not only the bulk tumor, but also TICs that initiate and promote the metastatic spread and recurrence of this aggressive subtype of BC.
Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) lack expression of oestrogen, progesterone and HER2 receptors. The gene expression profiles of TNBCs are similar to those of breast tumours in women with BRCA1 mutations. Reports to date indicate that up to 20 % of TNBC patients harbour germline BRCA mutations; however, the prevalence of BRCA mutations in TNBC patients varies widely between countries and from study to study. We studied 774 women with triple-negative breast cancer, diagnosed on average at age 58.0 years. Samples of genomic DNA were provided by the Australian Breast Cancer Tissue Bank (ABCTB) (439 patients) and by the Department of Genetics and Pathology of the Pomeranian Medical University (335 patients). The entire coding regions and the exon-intron boundaries of BRCA1 and BRCA2 were amplified and sequenced by next-generation sequencing. We identified a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation in 74 of 774 (9.6 %) triple-negative patients. The mutation prevalence was 9.3 % in Australia and was 9.9 % in Poland. In both countries, the mean age of diagnoses of BRCA1 mutation carriers was significantly lower than that of non-carriers, while the age of onset of BRCA2 mutation carriers was similar to that of non-carriers. In the Australian cohort, 59 % of the mutation-positive patients did not have a family history of breast or ovarian cancer, and would not have qualified for genetic testing. The triple-negative phenotype should be added as a criterion to genetic screening guidelines.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs composed of 18-25 nucleotides that can post-transcriptionally regulate gene expression and have key regulatory roles in cancer, acting as both oncogenes and tumor suppressors. About 1000 genes in humans encode miRNAs, which account for approximately 3% of the human genome, and up to 30% of human protein coding genes may be regulated by miRNAs. The objective of this article is to evaluate the expression profile of four miRNAs previously implicated in triple negative breast cancer: miR-10b, miR-26a, miR-146a and miR-153, and to determine their possible interaction in triple negative and non triple negative breast cancer based on clinical outcome and the expression of BRCA1. 24 triple-negative and 13 non triple negative breast cancer cases, were studied by q-RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry to determine the expression of the four studied miRNAs and the BRCA1 protein, respectively. We observed that the BRCA1 protein was absent in 62.5% of the triple negative cases. Besides, the miR-146a and miR-26a were over expressed in triple negative breast cancer. These two miRNAs, miR-10b and miR-153 were significantly associated to lymph node metastases occurrence in triple negative breast carcinoma. All the analyzed microRNAs were not associated with the expression of BRCA1 in our conditions. Our work provides evidence that miR-146a, miR-26a, miR-10b and miR-153 could be defined as biomarkers in triple negative breast cancer to predict lymph node metastases (LNM).
PURPOSE: The current American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging manual uses tumor size, lymph node, and metastatic status to stage breast cancer across different subtypes. We examined the prognosis of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) versus non-TNBC within the same stages and sub-stages to evaluate whether TNBC had worse prognosis than non-TNBC.METHODS: We reviewed the National Cancer Institute Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) data and identified 158,358 patients diagnosed with breast cancer from 2010 to 2012. The overall survival (OS) time and breast cancer cause-specific survival time were compared between patients with TNBC and non-TNBC in each stage and sub-stages. The results were validated using a dataset of 2049 patients with longer follow-up from our institution.RESULTS: Compared with patients with non-TNBC, patients with TNBC had worse OS and breast cancer cause-specific survival time in every stage and sub-stage in univariate and multivariate analyses adjusting for age, race, tumor grade, and surgery and radiation treatments in the SEER data. The worse OS time in patients with TNBC was validated in our institutional dataset.CONCLUSIONS: Patients with TNBC have worse survival than patients with non-TNBC. The new AJCC staging manual should consider breast cancer biomarker information.
Breast cancer (BC) is the most frequent tumor worldwide. Triple-negative BCs are characterized by the negative estrogen and progesterone receptors and negative HER2, and represent 15% of all BCs. In this review, data on the use of taxanes in triple-negative BCs are analyzed, concluding they are effective in any clinical setting (neoadjuvant, adjuvant, and metastatic). Further, the role of nab-paclitaxel (formulation of albumin-bound paclitaxel) in these tumors is also evaluated. The available data show the clinical potential of nab-paclitaxel based combinations in terms of long-duration response, increased survival, and better quality of life of patients with triple-negative metastatic BC. The ongoing trials will give further information on the better management of this type of tumor.
Purpose: The administration of autologous tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) can mediate durable tumor regressions in patients with melanoma likely based on the recognition of immunogenic somatic mutations expressed by the cancer. There are limited data regarding the immunogenicity of mutations in breast cancer. We sought to identify immunogenic nonsynonymous mutations in a patient with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) to identify and isolate mutation-reactive TILs for possible use in adoptive cell transfer.Experimental Design: A TNBC metastasis was resected for TIL generation and whole-exome sequencing. Tandem minigenes or long 25-mer peptides encoding selected mutations were electroporated or pulsed onto autologous antigen-presenting cells, and reactivity of TIL was screened by upregulation of CD137 and IFNγ ELISPOT. The nature of the T-cell response against a unique nonsynonymous mutation was characterized.Results: We identified 72 nonsynonymous mutations from the tumor of a patient with TNBC. CD4+ and HLA-DRB1*1501-restricted TILs isolated from this tumor recognized a single mutation in RBPJ (recombination signal binding protein for immunoglobulin kappa J region). Analysis of 16 metastatic sites revealed that the mutation was ubiquitously present in all samples.Conclusions: Breast cancers can express naturally processed and presented unique nonsynonymous mutations that are recognized by a patient's immune system. TILs recognizing these immunogenic mutations can be isolated from a patient's tumor, suggesting that adoptive cell transfer of mutation-reactive TILs could be a viable treatment option for patients with breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res; 23(15); 4347-53. ©2017 AACR.
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a highly aggressive disease characterized by a high number of relapses and poor overall survival. The heterogeneity of the disease and the limited treatment options compared to other breast cancer subtypes mainly explain these clinical outcomes. New biomarkers are urgently needed to improve the management of TNBC. Circulating tumor DNA, identified by tumor-related molecular alterations, could be used in the context of non-invasive "liquid biopsy" and help in TNBC diagnosis and treatment decisions. In this review, we discuss the key issues related to the potential of circulating tumor DNA to improve the management of this disease and the future steps to overcome before its implementation into clinical routine within the next 5 years.
Triple-negative breast cancers are a heterogeneous group of tumors that are, as yet, not entirely understood. Although triple-negative carcinomas are strictly defined as invasive carcinomas lacking expression of estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER2, some use the terms triple-negative and basal-like cancer synonymously. It should be noted that these are not entirely equivalent. Nevertheless, it has been shown that a panel of immunohistochemical markers can be used as a surrogate for genomic profiling and thus to identify basal-like breast cancers. We describe the panels of immunohistochemical markers that can be applied and how to interpret these markers herein.
Patients diagnosed with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) have a high rate of tumor metastasis and a poor prognosis. The treatment option for these patients is currently chemotherapy, which results in very low response rates. Strategies that exploit the immune system for the treatment of cancer have now shown the ability to improve survival in several tumor types. Identifying potential targets for immune therapeutic interventions is an important step in developing novel treatments for TNBC. In this study, in silico analysis of publicly available datasets and immunohistochemical analysis of primary and metastatic tumor biopsies from TNBC patients were conducted to evaluate the expression of the transcription factor brachyury, which is a driver of tumor metastasis and resistance and a target for cancer vaccine approaches. Analysis of breast cancer datasets demonstrated a predominant expression of brachyury mRNA in TNBC and in basal vs luminal or HER2 molecular breast cancer subtypes. At the protein level, variable levels of brachyury expression were detected both in primary and metastatic TNBC lesions. A strong association was observed between nuclear brachyury protein expression and the stage of disease, with nuclear brachyury being more predominant in metastatic vs primary tumors. Survival analysis also demonstrated an association between high levels of brachyury in the primary tumor and poor prognosis. Two brachyury-targeting cancer vaccines are currently undergoing clinical evaluation; the data presented here provide rationale for using brachyury-targeting immunotherapy approaches for the treatment of TNBC.
While there are targeted treatments for triple positive breast cancers, lack of specific biomarkers for triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) has hindered the development of therapies for this subset of cancers. In this study, we evaluated the anticancer properties of cardiac glycoside Digitoxin (Dtx) and its synthetic analog MonoD on breast cancer cell lines MCF-7 (estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer) and MDA-MB-468 (triple-negative breast cancer). Both cardiac glycosides, at concentrations within the therapeutic range, increased the fraction of cells in the G0/G1 phase of the cell cycle, decreased viability, and inhibited the migration of MCF-7 and MDA-MB-468 cells. Both cardiac glycosides increased production of superoxide and induced apoptosis in both cell types. Reduced protein levels of nuclear factor kappa B and IkappaB kinase-beta were found in cardiac glycoside-treated cells, indicating that the cellular effects of these compounds are mediated via nuclear factor kappa B pathway. This study demonstrates the cytotoxic potential of digitoxin, and more importantly its synthetic analog MonoD, in the treatment of triple-positive breast cancer and more importantly the aggressive triple-negative breast cancer. Collectively, this study provides a basis for the reevaluation of cardiac glycosides in the treatment of breast cancer and more importantly reveals their potential in the treatment of triple-negative breast cancers.
Triple-negative breast cancers constitute about 15% of all cases, but despite their higher response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy, the tumors are very aggressive and associated with a poor prognosis as well as a higher risk of early recurrence. This study was retrospectively performed on 101 patients with stage II and III invasive breast cancer who received 6-8 cycles of neo-adjuvant chemotherapy. Out of the total, 23 were in the triple negative breast cancer subgroup. Nuclear Ki-67 expression in both the large cohort group (n=101) and triple negative breast cancer subgroup (n=23) and its relation to the pathological response were evaluated. The purpose of the study was to identify the predictive value of nuclear protein Ki-67 expression among patients with invasive breast cancers, involving the triple negative breast cancer subgroup, treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy in correlation to the rate of pathological complete response. The proliferation marker Ki-67 expression was highest in the triple negative breast cancer subgroup. No appreciable difference in the rate of Ki-67 expression in triple negative breast cancer subgroup using either a cutoff of 14% or 35%. Triple negative breast cancer subgroup showed lower rates of pathological complete response. Achievement of pathological complete response was significantly correlated with smaller tumor size and higher Ki-67 expression. The majority of triple negative breast cancer cases achieved pathological partial response. The study concluded that Ki-67 is a useful tool to predict chemosensitivity in the setting of neoadjuvant chemotherapy for invasive breast cancer but not for the triple negative breast cancer subgroup.
Effective treatment of patients with triple-negative (ER-negative, PR-negative, HER2-negative) breast cancer remains a challenge. Although PARP inhibitors are being evaluated in clinical trials, biomarkers are needed to identify patients who will most benefit from anti-PARP therapy. We determined the responses of three PARP inhibitors (veliparib, olaparib, and talazoparib) in a panel of eight triple-negative breast cancer cell lines. Therapeutic responses and cellular phenotypes were elucidated using high-content imaging and quantitative immunofluorescence to assess markers of DNA damage (53BP1) and apoptosis (cleaved PARP). We determined the pharmacodynamic changes as percentage of cells positive for 53BP1, mean number of 53BP1 foci per cell, and percentage of cells positive for cleaved PARP. Inspired by traditional dose-response measures of cell viability, an EC50 value was calculated for each cellular phenotype and each PARP inhibitor. The EC50 values for both 53BP1 metrics strongly correlated with IC50 values for each PARP inhibitor. Pathway enrichment analysis identified a set of DNA repair and cell cycle-associated genes that were associated with 53BP1 response following PARP inhibition. The overall accuracy of our 63 gene set in predicting response to olaparib in seven breast cancer patient-derived xenograft tumors was 86%. In triple-negative breast cancer patients who had not received anti-PARP therapy, the predicted response rate of our gene signature was 45%. These results indicate that 53BP1 is a biomarker of response to anti-PARP therapy in the laboratory, and our DNA damage response gene signature may be used to identify patients who are most likely to respond to PARP inhibition. Mol Cancer Ther; 16(12); 2892-901. ©2017 AACR.
Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive breast cancer subtype that lacks estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) amplification. Due to the absence of these receptors, TNBC does not respond to traditional endocrine or HER2-targeted therapies that improve patient prognosis in other breast cancer subtypes. TNBC has a poor prognosis, and currently, there are no effective targeted therapies. Some TNBC tumors express androgen receptor (AR) and may benefit from AR-targeted therapies. Here, we review the literature on AR in TNBC and propose that TNBC be further sub-classified as either AR+ TNBC or quadruple negative breast cancer since targeting AR may represent a viable therapeutic option for a subset of TNBC.
OBJECTIVES: Triple-negative breast cancer is regarded as an aggressive disease that affects a young patient population and for which effective targeted therapy is not yet available.METHODS: Intense efforts have been made to gain a better understanding of this heterogeneous group of tumors from the histologic to the genomic and molecular levels.RESULTS: Progress has been made, including the ability to subtype these tumors and the discovery of biomarkers toward which current therapeutic efforts are focused. Many novel targets under exploration have the potential to affect the clinical course of this disease.CONCLUSIONS: This article reviews the current concepts regarding the clinicopathologic features of triple-negative breast carcinoma, its histologic subtypes, molecular classification, the prognostic and therapeutic potential of biomarkers, and emerging targeted therapies.
Among breast cancer types, triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) has the fewest treatment options and the lowest 5-year survival rate. Androgen receptor (AR) inhibition has displayed efficacy against breast cancer preclinically and is currently being examined clinically in AR positive TNBC patients. Androgen deprivation has been shown to induce immunogenic modulation; the alteration of tumor cell phenotype resulting in increased sensitivity to immune-mediated killing. We evaluated the ability of AR inhibition to reduce the growth and improve the immune-mediated killing of breast cancer cells with differing expression of the estrogen receptor and AR. While AR expression was required for the growth inhibitory effects of enzalutamide on breast cancer cells, both enzalutamide and abiraterone improved the sensitivity of breast cancer cells to immune-mediated lysis independent of detectable AR expression. This increase in sensitivity was linked to an increase in cell surface tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) receptor expression as well as a significant reduction in the expression of osteoprotegerin (OPG). The reduction in OPG was further examined and found to be critical for the increase in sensitivity of AR- TNBC cells to immune-mediated killing. The data presented herein further support the use of AR inhibition therapy in the AR+ TNBC setting. These data, however, also support the consideration of AR inhibition therapy for the treatment of AR- TNBC, especially in combination with cancer immunotherapy, providing a potential novel therapeutic option for select patients.
The "neurofibromatoses" are a set of distinct genetic disorders that have in common the occurrence of tumors of the nerve sheath. They include NF1, NF2, and schwannomatosis. All are dominantly inherited with a high rate of new mutation and variable expression. NF1 includes effects on multiple systems of the body. The major NF1-associated tumor is the neurofibroma. In addition, clinical manifestations include bone dysplasia, learning disabilities, and an increased risk of malignancy. NF2 includes schwannomas of multiple cranial and spinal nerves, especially the vestibular nerve, as well as other tumors such as meningiomas and ependymomas. The schwannomatosis phenotype is limited to multiple schwannomas, and usually presents with pain. The genes that underlie each of the disorders are known: NF1 for neurofibromatosis type 1, NF2 for neurofibromatosis type 2, and INI1/SMARCB1 for schwannomatosis. Genetic testing is possible to identify mutations. Insights into pathogenesis are beginning to suggest new treatment strategies, and therapeutic trials with several new forms of treatment are underway.
BACKGROUND: We report two cases of mosaic generalized neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) and review the history of the classification of segmental neurofibromatosis (SNF; Ricardi type NF-V). Somatic mutations giving rise to limited disease, such as segmental neurofibromatosis are manifestations of mosaicism. If the mutation occurs before tissue differentiation, the clinical phenotype will be generalized disease. Mutations that occur later in development give rise to disease that is confined to a single region.OBJECTIVES: Segmental neurofibromatosis is caused by a somatic mutation of neurofibromatosis type 1, and should not be regarded as a distinct entity from neurofibromatosis 1. Cases previously referred to as unilateral or bilateral segmental neurofibromatosis are now best referred to as mosaic generalized or mosaic localized neurofibromatosis 1.
Familial spinal neurofibromatosis (FSNF) is a rare form of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) characterized by multiple, histologically proven neurofibromas of the spinal roots leaving no intact segments and associated neurofibromas of major peripheral nerves. It is sometimes associated with other NF1 stigmata. Most patients have NF1 gene mutations. We describe a patient who fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for spinal neurofibromatosis and belonged to a family in which other affected members exhibited classical NF1 stigmata. A novel missense (c.7109 T>A; p.Val2370Asp) mutation in exon 39 of the NF1 gene was present in the affected family members. The family displayed extreme phenotypic variability in the spectrum of NF1. To our knowledge, this is the first patient with spinal neurofibromatosis in the context of classical NF1 with an NF1 gene mutation. The term FSNF is inaccurate as this condition simply reflects the typical autosomal dominant pattern of NF1 inheritance with phenotypoc variability and does not encompass patients with sporadic disease or those in the context of a classical NF1 phenotype as reported in the present family. The term could be replaced by "spinal neurofibromatosis".
Giant plexiform neurofibroma (GPNF) of the scalp is an extremely rare lesion reported in association with neurofibromatosis. Occipital location of GPNF is even more infrequent, especially in association with occipital dysplasia (OD). The authors report 2 pediatric cases of GPNF associated with OD. The first case had an associated meningoencephalocele, and the second had large vascular channels within the lesion and the dominant ipsilateral transverse sinus lying in the center of the calvarial defect. The authors present these 2 unusual cases with a review of literature and discuss the radiological findings, theories of etiopathogenesis of the OD, and management dilemmas.
Neurofibromatosis 1, neurofibromatosis 2, and schwannomatosis are a group of related classically inherited but often times sporadic tumor suppressor syndromes. Neuro-oncologists should recognize these syndromes, initiate necessary tests in patients with a clinical suspicion, and support genetic counseling of patients and families. In this review, clinical presentation, diagnostic criteria, day-to-day management including supportive care as well as updates on genetics, and experimental treatment strategies are discussed.
Neurofibromatosis, which was first described in 1882 by Von Recklinghausen, is a genetic disease characterized by a neuroectodermal abnormality and by clinical manifestations of systemic and progressive involvement which mainly affect the skin, nervous system, bones, eyes and possibly other organs. The disease may manifest in several ways and it can vary from individual to individual. Given the wealth of information about neurofibromatosis, we attempted to present this information in different ways. In the first part of this work, we present a chronological history, which describes the evolution of the disease since the early publications about the disorder until the conclusion of this work, focusing on relevant aspects which can be used by those wishing to investigate this disease. In the second part, we present an update on the various aspects that constitute this disease.
The aim of this study was to review the literature on quality of life among adult patients with neurofibromatosis 1, neurofibromatosis 2 and schwannomatosis, and to identify the specific aspects of quality of life that were studied and reported in this population. We also set out to report predictors of quality of life. Published research reports were included if they described quality of life in this population and met methodological quality according to a list of predefined criteria. Eight studies (7 in NF1, 1 in NF2, 0 in schwannomatosis), conducted between 2001 and 2013, met inclusion criteria. The methodological quality of the eight studies was mostly high according to ratings by predefined criteria. Most studies reported that patients with NF experience decreased quality of life when compared to the general population. Visibility and disease severity were strong predictors of skin-specific quality of life in NF1 patients. However, the majority of findings regarding predictors of quality of life were weak or inconclusive. Given the decreased quality of life in NF patients, it is important to examine more comprehensively the psychosocial factors in this population, especially in patients with NF2 and schwannomatosis. Mind body interventions that address these domains may provide comprehensive and efficacious long term treatment.
The studies of familial tumor predisposition syndromes have contributed immensely to our understanding of oncogenesis. Neurofibromatosis 1, neurofibromatosis 2 and schwannomatosis are inherited autosomal dominant neurocutaneous disorders with complete penetrance. They are clinically and genetically distinct and considerable knowledge has been gathered about their pathogenesis. In this chapter, the genetics, molecular mechanism of disease, as well as clinical features, diagnosis and treatment are discussed.
PURPOSE: To determine whether an epidemiologic association exists between glomus tumors and neurofibromatosis.METHODS: Using a pathology database, we established a study cohort consisting of all patients who had undergone excision of a glomus tumor of the hand between 1995 and 2010. We created a control cohort by randomly selecting 200 patients who had undergone excision of a ganglion cyst over the same period. We reviewed medical records for each cohort to identify patients with a diagnosis of neurofibromatosis. We calculated the odds ratio was calculated and performed Fisher's exact test to determine the significance of the association.RESULTS: We identified 21 patients with glomus tumors of the hand. Six of these patients carried the diagnosis of neurofibromatosis (29%). In contrast, no patients in the control group carried the diagnosis of neurofibromatosis. The odds ratio for a diagnosis of neurofibromatosis in association with a glomus tumor compared with controls was 168:1.CONCLUSIONS: This study provides evidence of a strong epidemiologic association between glomus tumors and neurofibromatosis. Glomus tumor should be included in the differential diagnosis in neurofibromatosis patients who present with a painful lesion of the hand or finger.TYPE OF STUDY/LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Diagnostic III.Copyright © 2013 American Society for Surgery of the Hand. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Osteogenesis imperfecta is a phenotypically and molecularly heterogeneous group of inherited connective tissue disorders that share similar skeletal abnormalities causing bone fragility and deformity. Previously, the disorder was thought to be an autosomal dominant bone dysplasia caused by defects in type I collagen, but in the past 10 years discoveries of novel (mainly recessive) causative genes have lent support to a predominantly collagen-related pathophysiology and have contributed to an improved understanding of normal bone development. Defects in proteins with very different functions, ranging from structural to enzymatic and from intracellular transport to chaperones, have been described in patients with osteogenesis imperfecta. Knowledge of the specific molecular basis of each form of the disorder will advance clinical diagnosis and potentially stimulate targeted therapeutic approaches. In this Seminar, together with diagnosis, management, and treatment, we describe the defects causing osteogenesis imperfecta and their mechanism and interrelations, and classify them into five groups on the basis of the metabolic pathway compromised, specifically those related to collagen synthesis, structure, and processing; post-translational modification; folding and cross-linking; mineralisation; and osteoblast differentiation.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Here we summarize the diagnosis of osteogenesis imperfecta, discuss newly discovered genes involved in osteogenesis imperfecta, and review the management of this disease in children and adults.RECENT FINDINGS: Mutations in the two genes coding for collagen type I, COL1A1 and COL1A2, are the most common cause of osteogenesis imperfecta. In the past 10 years, defects in at least 17 other genes have been identified as responsible for osteogenesis imperfecta phenotypes, with either dominant or recessive transmission. Intravenous bisphosphonate infusions are the most widely used medical treatment. This has a marked effect on vertebra in growing children and can lead to vertebral reshaping after compression fractures. However, bisphosphonates are less effective for preventing long-bone fractures. At the moment, new therapies are under investigation.SUMMARY: Despite advances in the diagnosis and treatment of osteogenesis imperfecta, more research is needed. Bisphosphonate treatment decreases long-bone fracture rates, but such fractures are still frequent. New antiresorptive and anabolic agents are being investigated but efficacy and safety of these drugs, especially in children, need to be better established before they can be used in clinical practice.
Osteogenesis imperfecta is an inherited connective tissue disorder with wide phenotypic and molecular heterogeneity. A common issue associated with the molecular abnormality is a disturbance in bone matrix synthesis and homeostasis inducing bone fragility. In very early life, this can lead to multiple fractures and progressive bone deformities, including long bone bowing and scoliosis. Multidisciplinary management improves quality of life for patients with osteogenesis imperfecta. It consists of physical therapy, medical treatment and orthopaedic surgery as necessary. Medical treatment consists of bone-remodelling drug therapy. Bisphosphonates are widely used in the treatment of moderate to severe osteogenesis imperfecta, from infancy to adulthood. Other more recent drug therapies include teriparatide and denosumab. All these therapies target the symptoms and have effects on the mechanical properties of bone due to modification of bone remodelling, therefore influencing skeletal outcome and orthopaedic surgery. Innovative therapies, such as progenitor and mesenchymal stem cell transplantation, targeting the specific altered pathway rather than the symptoms, are in the process of development.
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a rare disorder of type 1 collagen with 13 currently identified types attributable to inherited abnormalities in type 1 collagen amount, structure, or processing. The disease is characterized by an increased susceptibility to bony fracture. In addition to the skeletal phenotype, common additional extraskeletal manifestations include blue sclerae, dentinogenesis imperfecta, vascular fragility, and hearing loss. Medical management is focused on minimizing the morbidity of fractures, pain, and bone deformities by maximizing bone health. Along with optimizing Vitamin D status and calcium intake and physical/occupational therapy, individualized surgical treatment may be indicated. Pharmacological therapy with bisphosphonate medications is now routinely utilized for moderate to severe forms and appears to have a good safety profile and bone health benefits. New therapies with other anti-resorptives as well as anabolic agents and transforming growth factor (TGF)β antibodies are in development. Other potential treatment modalities could include gene therapy or mesenchymal cell transplant. In the future, treatment choices will be further individualized in order to reduce disease morbidity and mortality.
Recently, the genetic heterogeneity in osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), proposed in 1979 by Sillence et al., has been confirmed with molecular genetic studies. At present, 17 genetic causes of OI and closely related disorders have been identified and it is expected that more will follow. Unlike most reviews that have been published in the last decade on the genetic causes and biochemical processes leading to OI, this review focuses on the clinical classification of OI and elaborates on the newly proposed OI classification from 2010, which returned to a descriptive and numerical grouping of five OI syndromic groups. The new OI nomenclature and the pre-and postnatal severity assessment introduced in this review, emphasize the importance of phenotyping in order to diagnose, classify, and assess severity of OI. This will provide patients and their families with insight into the probable course of the disorder and it will allow physicians to evaluate the effect of therapy. A careful clinical description in combination with knowledge of the specific molecular genetic cause is the starting point for development and assessment of therapy in patients with heritable disorders including OI. © 2014 The Authors. American Journal of Medical Genetics Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.
Although non-accidental injuries (NAI) are more common in cases of unexplained fractures than rare disorders such as osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), ruling out OI and other medical causes of fracture is always indicated. The majority of OI patients can be diagnosed with the help of family history, physical examination, and radiographic findings. In particular, there are a few radiological findings which are seen more commonly in NAI than in OI which may help guide clinician considerations regarding the probability of either of these diagnoses. At the same time, molecular testing still merits careful consideration in cases with unexplained fractures without obvious additional signs of abuse.
Osteogenesis imperfecta is a heritable group of collagen-related disorders that affects up to 50,000 people in the United States. Although the disease is most symptomatic in childhood, adults with osteogenesis imperfecta also are affected by the sequelae of the disease. Orthopaedic manifestations include posttraumatic and accelerated degenerative joint disease, kyphoscoliosis, and spondylolisthesis. Other manifestations of abnormal collagen include brittle dentition, hearing loss, cardiac valve abnormalities, and basilar invagination. In general, nonsurgical treatment is preferred for management of acute fractures. High rates of malunion, nonunion, and subsequent deformity have been reported with both closed and open treatment. When surgery is necessary, surgeons should opt for load-sharing intramedullary devices that span the entire length of the bone; locking plates and excessively rigid fixation generally should be avoided. Arthroplasty may be considered for active patients, but the procedure frequently is associated with complications in this patient population. Underlying deformities, such as malunion, bowing, rotational malalignment, coxa vara, and acetabular protrusio, pose specific surgical challenges and underscore the importance of preoperative planning.
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heritable bone fragility disorder that presents with a wide clinical phenotype spectrum: from perinatal lethality and severe deformities to very mild forms without fractures. Most cases of OI are due to autosomal dominant mutations of the type I collagen genes. A multidisciplinary approach with rehabilitation, orthopedic surgery, and consideration of medical therapy with bisphosphonates underpins current management. Greater understanding of the pathogenesis of OI may lead to novel, therapeutic approaches to help improve clinical symptoms of children with OI in the future.
A new paradigm has emerged for osteogenesis imperfecta as a collagen-related disorder. The more prevalent autosomal dominant forms of osteogenesis imperfecta are caused by primary defects in type I collagen, whereas autosomal recessive forms are caused by deficiency of proteins which interact with type I procollagen for post-translational modification and/or folding. Factors that contribute to the mechanism of dominant osteogenesis imperfecta include intracellular stress, disruption of interactions between collagen and noncollagenous proteins, compromised matrix structure, abnormal cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions and tissue mineralization. Recessive osteogenesis imperfecta is caused by deficiency of any of the three components of the collagen prolyl 3-hydroxylation complex. Absence of 3-hydroxylation is associated with increased modification of the collagen helix, consistent with delayed collagen folding. Other causes of recessive osteogenesis imperfecta include deficiency of the collagen chaperones FKBP10 or Serpin H1. Murine models are crucial to uncovering the common pathways in dominant and recessive osteogenesis imperfecta bone dysplasia. Clinical management of osteogenesis imperfecta is multidisciplinary, encompassing substantial progress in physical rehabilitation and surgical procedures, management of hearing, dental and pulmonary abnormalities, as well as drugs, such as bisphosphonates and recombinant human growth hormone. Novel treatments using cell therapy or new drug regimens hold promise for the future.
This retrospective study on long-term outcomes in osteogenesis imperfecta type VI found that patients who received intravenous bisphosphonate treatment had an increase in lumbar spine areal bone mineral density, a higher final height z-score, and some reshaping of vertebral bodies.INTRODUCTION: Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) type VI is an ultra-rare bone fragility disorder caused by recessive mutations in SERPINF1. Here, we describe long-term outcomes in OI type VI and compare the clinical phenotypes caused by different types of SERPINF1 mutations.METHODS: This study includes a retrospective chart review of 13 individuals with OI type VI.RESULTS: In the absence of therapy, lumbar spine areal bone mineral density (BMD) did not increase during childhood and longitudinal growth seemed to stall after the age of 6 to 8 years. The phenotype was similar between individuals with different types of SERPINF1 mutations. Intravenous bisphosphonate treatment was associated with an increase in lumbar spine areal BMD and some reshaping of compressed vertebral bodies. Patients who had started bisphosphonate treatment early (before the age of 6 years) were taller than patients who had received bisphosphonate treatment later during their growing years. Lower extremity fractures were frequent despite bisphosphonate treatment and scoliosis was present in all patients who had reached the final height. Most patients had restricted mobility. In four patients, intravenous bisphosphonate treatment was eventually substituted by subcutaneous injections of denosumab, without clear changes in the clinical picture.CONCLUSIONS: Patients with OI type VI who received intravenous bisphosphonate treatment during growth had an increase in lumbar spine areal BMD, a higher final height z-score, and presented some reshaping of vertebral bodies. More effective treatment modalities are clearly required in OI type VI.
Osteogenesis imperfecta entrains changes at every level in bone tissue, from the disorganization of the collagen molecules and mineral platelets within and between collagen fibrils to the macroarchitecture of the whole skeleton. Investigations using an array of sophisticated instruments at multiple scale levels have now determined many aspects of the effect of the disease on the material properties of bone tissue. The brittle nature of bone in osteogenesis imperfecta reflects both increased bone mineralization density-the quantity of mineral in relation to the quantity of matrix within a specific bone volume-and altered matrix-matrix and matrix mineral interactions. Contributions to fracture resistance at multiple scale lengths are discussed, comparing normal and brittle bone. Integrating the available information provides both a better understanding of the effect of current approaches to treatment-largely improved architecture and possibly some macroscale toughening-and indicates potential opportunities for alternative strategies that can influence fracture resistance at longer-length scales.
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), an inherited skeletal disorder characterized by low bone mass, bone fragility, and often short stature. The clinical severity varies widely from being nearly asymptomatic with a mild predisposition to fractures, normal stature and normal lifespan being to profoundly disabling and even lethal. Extra skeletal manifestations may include blue-grey sclera and dental abnormalities. Initially, the classification of OI into four types was based on clinical findings, but more recently additional types OI (types V-XI) have been ascertained, based on the identification of different mutations. While this classification is somewhat controversial, it is described in this article. The treatment of patients with OI is based on the nature and severity of symptoms. The goal of therapy is to prevent fractures and disability, improve function and quality of life. A multidisciplinary approach is needed, and treatment options include medication such as bisphosphonates, surgery, and rehabilitation. Investigations continue to explore gene and cell therapies that may be developed in the future.
Interferon-induced transmembrane protein 5 (IFITM5) is an osteoblast-specific membrane protein that has been shown to be a positive regulatory factor for mineralization in vitro. However, Ifitm5 knockout mice do not exhibit serious bone abnormalities, and thus the function of IFITM5 in vivo remains unclear. Recently, a single point mutation (c.-14C>T) in the 5' untranslated region of IFITM5 was identified in patients with osteogenesis imperfecta type V (OI-V). Furthermore, a single point mutation (c.119C>T) in the coding region of IFITM5 was identified in OI patients with more severe symptoms than patients with OI-V. Although IFITM5 is not directly involved in the formation of bone in vivo, the reason why IFITM5 mutations cause OI remains a major mystery. In this review, the current state of knowledge of OI pathological mechanisms due to IFITM5 mutations will be reviewed.
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), also called "brittle bone disease," is a rare heterozygous connective tissue disorder that is caused by mutations of genes that affect collagen. Osteogenesis imperfecta is characterized by decreased bone mass, bone fragility, and skin hyperlaxity. The phenotype present is determined according to the mutation on the affected gene as well as the type and location of the mutation. Osteogenesis imperfecta is neither preventable nor treatable. Osteogenesis imperfecta is classified into 11 types to date, on the basis of their clinical symptoms and genetic components. This article discusses the definition of the disease, the classifications on the basis of its clinical features, incidence, etiology, and pathogenesis. In addition, phenotype, natural history, diagnosis and management of this disease, recurrence risk, and, most importantly, the implications for the neonatal nurse and management for the family are discussed.
Osteogenesis imperfecta is a genetic disorder of increased bone fragility, low bone mass, and other connective-tissue manifestations. The most frequently used classification outlines four clinical types, which we have expanded to seven distinct types. In most patients the disorder is caused by mutations in one of the two genes encoding collagen type 1, but in some individuals no such mutations are detectable. The most important therapeutic advance is the introduction of bisphosphonate treatment for moderate to severe forms of osteogenesis imperfecta. However, at present, the best treatment regimen and the long-term outcomes of bisphosphonate therapy are unknown. Although this treatment does not constitute a cure, it is an adjunct to physiotherapy, rehabilitation, and orthopaedic care. Gene-based therapy presently remains in the early stages of preclinical research.
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is the most common inherited form of bone fragility and includes a heterogenous group of genetic disorders which most commonly result from defects associated with type 1 collagen. 85%-90% of cases are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner and are caused by mutations in the COL1A1 and COL1A2 genes, leading to quantitative or qualitative defects in type 1 collagen. In the last decade, defects in several other proteins involved in the normal processing of type 1 collagen have been described. Recent advances in genetics have called for reconsideration of the classification of OI, however, most recent classifications align with the classic clinical classification by Sillence. The hallmark of the disease is bone fragility but other tissues are also affected. Intravenous bisphosphonates (BPs) are the most widely used intervention, having significant favorable effects regarding areal bone mineral density (BMD) and vertebral reshaping following fractures in growing children. BPs have a modest effect in long bone fracture incidence, their effects in adults with OI concerns only BMD, while there are reports of subtrochanteric fractures resembling atypical femoral fractures. Other therapies showing promising results include denosumab, teriparatide, sclerostin inhibition, combination therapy with antiresorptive and anabolic drugs and TGF-β inhibition. Gene targeting approaches are under evaluation. More research is needed to delineate the best therapeutic approach in this heterogeneous disease.
Cystic fibrosis is a common life-limiting autosomal recessive genetic disorder, with highest prevalence in Europe, North America, and Australia. The disease is caused by mutation of a gene that encodes a chloride-conducting transmembrane channel called the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), which regulates anion transport and mucociliary clearance in the airways. Functional failure of CFTR results in mucus retention and chronic infection and subsequently in local airway inflammation that is harmful to the lungs. CFTR dysfunction mainly affects epithelial cells, although there is evidence of a role in immune cells. Cystic fibrosis affects several body systems, and morbidity and mortality is mostly caused by bronchiectasis, small airways obstruction, and progressive respiratory impairment. Important comorbidities caused by epithelial cell dysfunction occur in the pancreas (malabsorption), liver (biliary cirrhosis), sweat glands (heat shock), and vas deferens (infertility). The development and delivery of drugs that improve the clearance of mucus from the lungs and treat the consequent infection, in combination with correction of pancreatic insufficiency and undernutrition by multidisciplinary teams, have resulted in remarkable improvements in quality of life and clinical outcomes in patients with cystic fibrosis, with median life expectancy now older than 40 years. Innovative and transformational therapies that target the basic defect in cystic fibrosis have recently been developed and are effective in improving lung function and reducing pulmonary exacerbations. Further small molecule and gene-based therapies are being developed to restore CFTR function; these therapies promise to be disease modifying and to improve the lives of people with cystic fibrosis.
Cystic fibrosis is a life-limiting, recessive disease caused by mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. Increased survival outcomes and the multisystem nature of the disease, including the involvement of hepatobiliary and gastrointestinal tracts, now require the need for more extensive knowledge and expertise in cystic fibrosis among gastroenterologists. Manifestations are either a direct consequence of the primary defect in cystic fibrosis or a secondary complication of the disease or therapy. Adult patients with cystic fibrosis also have an increased risk of malignancy in the gastrointestinal and pancreatico-biliary tracts compared with the general population. Novel treatments that target the basic defects in the CFTR protein have emerged, but to date not much is known about their effects on the gastrointestinal and hepatobiliary systems. The introduction of such therapies has provided new opportunities for the application of intestinal endpoints in clinical trials and the understanding of underlying disease mechanisms that affect the gut in cystic fibrosis.
OBJECTIVES: Study of currently approved drugs and exploration of future clinical development pipeline therapeutics for cystic fibrosis, and possible limitations in their use.METHODS: Extensive literature search using individual and a combination of key words related to cystic fibrosis therapeutics.KEY FINDINGS: Cystic fibrosis is an autosomal recessive disorder due to mutations in CFTR gene leading to abnormality of chloride channels in mucus and sweat producing cells. Respiratory system and GIT are primarily involved but eventually multiple organs are affected leading to life threatening complications. Management requires drug therapy, extensive physiotherapy and nutritional support. Previously, the focus was on symptomatic improvement and complication prevention but recently the protein rectifiers are being studied which are claimed to correct underlying structural and functional abnormalities. Some improvement is observed by the corrector drugs. Other promising approaches are gene therapy, targeting of cellular interactomes, and newer drugs for symptomatic improvement.CONCLUSIONS: The treatment has a long way to go as most of the existing therapeutics is for older children. Other limiting factors include mutation class, genetic profile, drug interactions, adverse effects, and cost. Novel approaches like gene transfer/gene editing, disease modeling and search for alternative targets are warranted.
Significant improvements in the treatment of cystic fibrosis over the last few decades have altered this lethal disease in children to a multisystem disorder with survival into adult life now common. In most developed countries the numbers of adult cystic fibrosis patients outnumber children. This is mainly due to improvements in care during early life. The principal cause of morbidity and mortality is pulmonary disease, and so the focus of new treatments has targeted the lungs. Identification of the underlying gene defect in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator has ushered in a new era in cystic fibrosis research, with prospects of a cure. In this article, we review the most exciting recent advances that correct defects in cellular processing, chloride channel function and gene therapy.
Although only identified as a distinct disease in the 1930s, it was soon apparent that Cystic Fibrosis (CF) had been present, but unrecognised, in European populations for many years - perhaps even centuries [1] . Within a decade of the early descriptions, the autosomal recessive nature of this genetic disease had been clarified, and its clinical features had been expanded. Secondary nutritional deficiencies complicated the underlying condition: the first clear description of CF as "a new disease", which included a speculation about its genetic basis (because there were 2 pairs of sibs in the case series) was published as Vitamin A deficiency in children [2]. The diagnosis was most often made at autopsy. When it was suspected in life, the diagnostic tests used included duodenal intubation to obtain fluid which would show impaired tryptic digestion of the coating of X-Ray film in CF children, and measurement of vitamin A in the blood. Some nutritional improvement could be expected with simple, rather inefficient pancreatic enzyme preparations, but it was not until mid-century that antibiotics began to treat pulmonary infections effectively. As a young doctor in the 1950s I soon became aware that the median age at death for affected children was about one year, and most died before reaching school age. .
Cystic fibrosis (CF), a monogenic disease caused by mutations in the CFTR gene on chromosome 7, is complex and greatly variable in clinical expression. Airways, pancreas, male genital system, intestine, liver, bone, and kidney are involved. The lack of CFTR or its impaired function causes fat malabsorption and chronic pulmonary infections leading to bronchiectasis and progressive lung damage. Previously considered lethal in infancy and childhood, CF has now attained median survivals of 50 years of age, mainly thanks to the early diagnosis through neonatal screening, recognition of mild forms, and an aggressive therapeutic attitude. Classical treatment includes pancreatic enzyme replacement, respiratory physiotherapy, mucolitics, and aggressive antibiotic therapy. A significant proportion of patients with severe symptoms still requires lung or, less frequently, liver transplantation. The great number of mutations and their diverse effects on the CFTR protein account only partially for CF clinical variability, and modifier genes have a role in modulating the clinical expression of the disease. Despite the increasing understanding of CFTR functioning, several aspects of CF need still to be clarified, e.g., the worse outcome in females, the risk of malignancies, the pathophysiology, and best treatment of comorbidities, such as CF-related diabetes or CF-related bone disorder. Research is focusing on new drugs restoring CFTR function, some already available and with good clinical impact, others showing promising preliminary results that need to be confirmed in phase III clinical trials.
Cystic fibrosis is the most common lethal genetic disease in white populations. The outlook for patients with the disease has improved steadily over many years, largely as a result of earlier diagnosis, more aggressive therapy, and provision of care in specialised centres. Researchers now have a more complete understanding of the molecular-biological defect that underlies cystic fibrosis, which is leading to new approaches to treatment. One of these treatments, hypertonic saline, is already in use, whereas others are in advanced stages of development. We review clinical care for cystic fibrosis and discuss recent advances in the understanding of its pathogenesis, implementation of screening of neonates, and development of therapies aimed at treating the basic defect.
In this article, we highlight cystic fibrosis (CF) research and case reports published in Pediatric Pulmonology during 2016. We also include articles from a variety of journals that are thematically related to these articles, or are of special interest to clinicians.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Almost 15 years have now passed since bacterial community profiling techniques were first used to analyse respiratory samples from people with cystic fibrosis. Since then, many different analytical approaches have been used to try to better understand the contribution of the cystic fibrosis lung microbiota to disease, with varying degrees of success. We examine the extent to which cystic fibrosis respiratory microbiome research has been successful in informing clinical decision-making, and highlight areas that we believe have the potential to yield important insight.RECENT FINDINGS: Recent research on the cystic fibrosis lung microbiome can be broadly divided into efforts to better characterize microbiota composition, particularly relative to key clinical events, and attempts to understand the cystic fibrosis lung microbiology as an interactive microbial system. The latter, in particular, has led to the development of a number of models in which microbiome-mediated processes precipitate clinical events.SUMMARY: Growing technological sophistication is enabling increasingly detailed microbiological data to be generated from cystic fibrosis respiratory samples. However, translating these data into clinically useful measures that accurately predict outcomes and guide treatments remains a formidable challenge. The development of systems biology approaches that enable the integration of complex microbiome and host-derived data provide an exciting opportunity to address this goal.
AIM: To describe the nature and consequences of the multi-system genetic condition cystic fibrosis with a view to ensuring optimal dental treatment planning for these patients.METHODS: A literature search was conducted to identify the key medical and dental manifestations of cystic fibrosis. These findings are discussed and utilised to create recommendations for treatment planning in patients with cystic fibrosis for the practising dental practitioner.RESULTS: Cystic fibrosis is a complex, lethal, multisystem autosomal recessive disorder resulting from mutations on chromosome 7 which result in dysfunction of an ion channel that sits on epithelial surfaces. Respiratory disease remains the leading cause of mortality. Survival has greatly increased in recent decades secondary to improved treatment and specialist care. Specific dental manifestations of the disease may result from the condition itself or complications of treatment. Modification of patient management may be necessary to provide optimum patient care.CONCLUSION: The pathophysiology and clinical manifestations are relevant to practicing dental practitioners and inform recommendations to be utilised to ensure optimal treatment planning for these patients.
Cystic fibrosis is a complex multi-systemic chronic disease characterized by progressive organ dysfunction with development of fibrosis, possibly affecting the heart. Over the last four decades pathological, experimental, and clinical evidence points towards the existence of a specific myocardial involvement in cystic fibrosis. Multi-modality cardiac imaging, especially recent echocardiographic techniques, evidenced diastolic and/or systolic ventricular dysfunction in cystic fibrosis leading to the concept of a cystic fibrosis-related cardiomyopathy. Hypoxemia and inflammation are among the most important factors for heart involvement in cystic fibrosis. Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Regulator was found to be involved in the regulation of cardiomyocyte contraction and may also account for cystic fibrosis-related myocardial dysfunction. This review, mainly focused on echocardiographic studies, seeks to synthesize the existing literature for and against the existence of heart involvement in cystic fibrosis, its mechanisms and prognostic implications. Careful investigation of the heart function may be helpful for risk stratification and therapeutic decisions in patients with cystic fibrosis.
Cystic fibrosis is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder that affects ion transport in exocrine glands. Inadequate ion transport causes dehydration and the production of thick secretions in organs such as the lungs, sinuses, pancreas, intestines, hepatobiliary tree, and vas deferens. Although cystic fibrosis usually is diagnosed through a sweat chloride test, medical imaging is used to monitor pathologic changes caused by the disease. This article discusses the respiratory and nonrespiratory manifestations of cystic fibrosis and describes the diagnosis and treatment of the disease. Because patients with cystic fibrosis tend to be young children, the article also covers ways to minimize radiation exposure from repeated imaging examinations.
There are now more adult than paediatric cystic fibrosis (CF) patients and their life expectancy continues to improve. This means that CF patients will be more commonly encountered in a variety of hospital settings including fertility services, gastrointestinal (GI) clinics, diabetes clinics, surgical wards, and acute admissions. Cystic fibrosis units welcome early contact when patients are admitted to other units and it is important to have a structured approach to their assessment and management.
Cystic fibrosis is the most common autosomal recessive disorder in white people, with a frequency of about 1 in 2500 livebirths. Discovery of the mutated gene encoding a defective chloride channel in epithelial cells--named cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR)--has improved our understanding of the disorder's pathophysiology and has aided diagnosis, but has shown the disease's complexity. Gene replacement therapy is still far from being used in patients with cystic fibrosis, mostly because of difficulties of targeting the appropriate cells. Life expectancy of patients with the disorder has been greatly increased over past decades because of better notions of symptomatic treatment strategies. Here, we summarise advances in understanding and treatment of cystic fibrosis, focusing on pulmonary disease, which accounts for most morbidity and deaths.
Studies published in the last year have expanded our knowledge of potential disease modifying agents in the treatment of class II, III and IV CFTR mutations, and included the first report of an efficacious gene therapy for CF. There is also an important message on increasing use of conventional chronic therapies even in milder disease, and the pernicious effect of chronic infection on pulmonary function.
PURPOSE: We present in this study our 10years experience in prenatal diagnosis of cystic fibrosis performed in the Tunisian population.PATIENTS AND METHODS: Based on family history, 40 Tunisian couples were selected for prenatal diagnosis. Fetal DNA was isolated from amniotic fluid collected by transabdominal amniocentesis or from chronic villi by transcervical chorionic villus sampling. The genetic analysis for cystic fibrosis mutations was performed by denaturant gradient gel electrophoresis and denaturing high-pressure liquid phase chromatography. We performed microsatellites analysis by capillary electrophoresis in order to verify the absence of maternal cell contamination.RESULTS: Thirteen fetuses were affected, 21 were heterozygous carriers and 15 were healthy with two normal alleles of CFTR gene. Ten couples opted for therapeutic abortion. The microsatellites genotyping showed the absence of contamination of the fetal DNA by maternal DNA in 93.75%.CONCLUSION: Our diagnostic strategy provides rapid and reliable prenatal diagnosis at risk families of cystic fibrosis.Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.
Improved life expectancy in cystic fibrosis (CF) has led to an expanding population of adults with CF, now representing almost 50 % of the total CF population. This creates new challenges from long-term complications such as diabetes mellitus (DM), a condition that is present in 40 %-50 % of adults with CF. Cystic fibrosis-related diabetes (CFRD) results from a primary defect of insulin deficiency and although sharing features with type 1 (DM1) and type 2 diabetes (DM2), it is a clinically distinct condition. Progression to diabetes is associated with poorer CF clinical outcomes and increased mortality. CFRD is not associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease and the prevalence of microvascular complications is lower than DM1 or DM2. Rather, the primary goal of insulin therapy is the preservation of lung function and optimization of nutritional status. There is increasing evidence that appropriate screening and early intervention with insulin can reverse weight loss and improve pulmonary function. This approach may include targeting postprandial hyperglycemia not detected by standard diagnostic tests such as the oral glucose tolerance test. Further clinical research is required to guide when and how much to intervene in patients who are already dealing with the burden of one chronic illness.
Cystic fibrosis is a complex genetic disease hallmarked by repetitive infectious exacerbations that leads to destruction of airway architecture, acute on chronic inflammatory changes, and deterioration in lung function. Predicting an exacerbation may help preempt some of these changes by the initiation of swift antibiotic and anti-inflammatory therapy. A search for biomarkers that could predict exacerbations or help guide duration of antibiotic therapy is being aggressively sought. In this review, we discuss the most recent and promising biomarkers that hopefully will assist in the future management of the CF patient.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The field of cystic fibrosis (CF) continues to evolve at a fast pace thanks to novel observations that have enabled deeper understanding of the disease pathophysiology. Parallel groundbreaking developments in innovative therapies permit, for the first time, distinct disease modification.RECENT FINDINGS: This review highlights important discoveries in fluid homeostasis and mucus secretion in CF that further informs the pathophysiology of the airway disease that characterizes CF. In addition, current concepts and novel paradigms, such as 'theratypes' and 'CF transmembrane conductance regulator chaperome', which will be important for the continued development of disease modifying therapies, are reviewed.SUMMARY: The rate of progress in the field continues to accelerate with new knowledge informing the development of innovative therapies. This has already led to tangible substantial and unprecedented clinical benefit for selected subsets of the CF patient population. In the years ahead, further knowledge acquisition may motivate the extension of these benefits to the larger population of people with CF.
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most frequent inherited disease in Caucasian populations and is due to a defect in the expression or activity of a chloride channel encoded by the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. Mutations in this gene affect organs with exocrine functions and the main cause of morbidity and mortality for CF patients is the lung pathology in which the defect in CFTR decreases chloride secretion, lowering the airway surface liquid height and increasing mucus viscosity. The compromised ASL dynamics leads to a favorable environment for bacterial proliferation and sustained inflammation resulting in epithelial lung tissue injury, fibrosis and remodeling. In CF, there exist a difference in lung pathology between men and women that is termed the "CF gender gap". Recent studies have shown the prominent role of the most potent form of estrogen, 17β-estradiol in exacerbating lung function in CF females and here, we review the role of this hormone in the CF gender dichotomy.
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most frequent monogenic genetic disease, autosomal recessive transmitted, characterized by an impressive clinical polymorphism and appreciative fatal prospective. Liver disease is the second non-pulmonary cause of death in cystic fibrosis, which, with increasing life expectancy, became an important management problem. Predisposing factors like male gender, pancreatic insufficiency, meconium ileus and severe mutation are incriminated to influence the occurrence of cystic fibrosis associated liver disease (CFLD). Our study included 174 patients with CF, monitored in the National Cystic Fibrosis Centre, Timisoara, Romania. They were routinely followed-up by clinical assessment, liver biochemical tests, ultrasound examinations and other methods like transient elastography, biopsy, in selected cases. Sixty-six patients, with median age at diagnosis 4.33 years, diagnosed with CFLD, without significant gender gap. CFLD was frequent in patients aged over eight years, with meconium ileus history, carriers of severe mutations (p=0.002). Pancreatic insufficiency, although present in 75% of patients with CFLD was not confirmed as risk factor, not male gender, in our study. CF children older than eight years, carriers of a severe genotype, with a positive history of meconium ileus, were more likely predisposed to CFLD.
Pulmonary exacerbation (PEx) is a hallmark of cystic fibrosis. Although several criteria have been proposed for the definition of PEx, no consensus has yet been reached. Very often, many PEx cases go unreported. A standardized and validated definition is needed to reduce variability in clinical practice. The pathophysiology of recurrent episodes remains unclear, and both onset and risk are multifactorial. PEx leads to increased healthcare costs, impaired quality of life and a cycle in which PEx causes loss of lung function, which predisposes to further episodes. The number of episodes affects survival. Although early diagnosis and aggressive treatment are highly recommended, measures to prevent the emergence of new PEx are even more important. In particular, inhaled antibiotics administered under new treatment schedules could play a key role in preventing exacerbations and thus delay decline in lung function and reduce mortality. The primary objective is zero exacerbations.
This is arguably the most exciting era in the treatment of Cystic Fibrosis (CF) with the emergence of potentially disease modifying therapies. The last year has seen fewer landmark papers, with the consolidation of existing knowledge and advances in the understanding of the patho-physiology and management of CF.
Patient registries provide useful information to afford more knowledge on rare diseases like Cystic Fibrosis (CF). Twenty-two studies originating from national CF registries, focusing on demographics, survival, genetics, nutritional status, and non-pulmonary complications, were published between December 2011 and March 2015. The purpose of this review article is to examine these reports, aiming attention to the clinical characteristics of CF patients included in the registries, current, and estimated future epidemiological data, the role of gender gap, the increasing survival in different countries. Some studies offer insights into pubertal growth and non-pulmonary complications, such as liver disease, nephropathy, and cancer. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2017;52:390-398.© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
The 29th Annual North American Cystic Fibrosis Conference was held in Phoenix, Arizona on October 8-10, 2015. Abstracts were published in a supplement to Pediatric Pulmonology.(1) In this review, we summarize presentations in several of the topic areas addressed at the conference. Our goal is to provide an overview of presentations with relevance to emerging or changing concepts in several areas rather than a comprehensive review. Citations from the conference are by first author and abstract number or symposium number, as designated in the supplement. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2016;51:650-657.© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Lessons from the sweat gland on cystic fibrosis (CF) began long before modern medicine became a science. In European folklore, the curse that "a child that taste salty when kissed will soon die" (Alonso y de los Ruyzes de Fonteca J. Diez Previlegios para Mugeres Prenadas. Henares, Spain, 1606) has been taken by many as a direct reference to cystic fibrosis [Busch R. Acta Univ Carol Med (Praha) 36: 13-15, 1990]. The high salt concentration in sweat from patients with CF is now accepted as almost pathognomonic with this fatal genetic disease, but the earliest descriptions of cystic fibrosis as a disease entity did not mention sweat or sweat glands (Andersen DH. Am J Dis Child 56: 344-399, 1938; Andersen DH, Hodges RG. Am J Dis Child 72: 62-80, 1946). Nonetheless, defective sweating soon became an inseparable, and major, component of the constellation of symptoms that diagnose "cystic fibrosis" (Davis PB. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 173: 475-482, 2006). The sweat gland has played a foremost role in diagnosing, defining pathophysiology, debunking misconceptions, and increasing our understanding of the effects of the disease on organs, tissues, cells, and molecules. The sweat gland has taught us much.
Mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene result in defective epithelial cAMP-dependent Cl(-) secretion and increased airway Na(+) absorption. The mechanistic links between these altered ion transport processes and the pathogenesis of cystic fibrosis lung disease, however, are unclear. To test the hypothesis that accelerated Na(+) transport alone can produce cystic fibrosis-like lung disease, we generated mice with airway-specific overexpression of epithelial Na(+) channels (ENaC). Here we show that increased airway Na(+) absorption in vivo caused airway surface liquid (ASL) volume depletion, increased mucus concentration, delayed mucus transport and mucus adhesion to airway surfaces. Defective mucus transport caused a severe spontaneous lung disease sharing features with cystic fibrosis, including mucus obstruction, goblet cell metaplasia, neutrophilic inflammation and poor bacterial clearance. We conclude that increasing airway Na(+) absorption initiates cystic fibrosis-like lung disease and produces a model for the study of the pathogenesis and therapy of this disease.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The field of cystic fibrosis (CF) is changing dramatically as the scientific knowledge accumulated since the cloning of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene is being translated into effective therapies to correct the basic defect and provide better disease models and in-depth understanding of the basic mechanisms of disease.RECENT FINDINGS: This review focuses on three main aspects of the recent advances in the field: understanding the lung disease pathophysiology (in particular, the early events that condition its onset), better definition of the complex microbiology of the CF airway, and therapeutic developments. Although the most recently developed therapies, whether approved or under study, do not constitute a definitive cure, the benefit to patients is already becoming clearly apparent.SUMMARY: As the field continues to change rapidly and new therapies are being identified, CF has become a paradigm for the application of concepts such as translational medicine, genomic medicine, and personalized care, with measurable clinical benefit for the patients affected by this disease.
Despite advances in medical care, patients with cystic fibrosis still face limited life expectancy. The most common cause of death remains respiratory failure. End-stage cystic fibrosis can be treated with lung transplantation and is the third most common reason for which the procedure is performed. Outcomes for cystic fibrosis are better than most other lung diseases, but remain limited (5-year survival 60%). For patients with advanced disease lung transplantation appears to improve survival. Outcomes for patients with Burkholderia cepacia remain poor, although they are better for patients with certain genomovars. Controversy exists about Mycobacterium abscessus infection and appropriateness for transplant. More information is also becoming available for comorbidities, including diabetes and pulmonary hypertension among others. Extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation is used more frequently for end-stage disease as a bridge to lung transplantation and will likely be used more in the future.

Cystic fibrosis is caused by mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene that lead to abnormalities in transepithelial ion transport in the airways of affected patients. Lung disease is the major contributor to morbidity and mortality in patients with cystic fibrosis but recommended therapeutic interventions so far have focussed on symptom control rather than treatment of the underlying causes of the disease. New therapies that are currently in pre-clinical and clinical testing include CFTR pharmacotherapy, drugs targeting other ion channels, and hydrators of the cystic fibrosis airways. The current status of these and other new developments in the treatment of cystic fibrosis are reviewed.
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) is a Th2 hypersensitivity lung disease in response to Aspergillus fumigatus that affects asthmatic and cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. Sensitization to A. fumigatus is common in both atopic asthmatic and CF patients, yet only 1-2% of asthmatic and 7-9% of CF patients develop ABPA. ABPA is characterized by wheezing and pulmonary infiltrates which may lead to pulmonary fibrosis and/or bronchiectasis. The inflammatory response is characterized by Th2 responses to Aspergillus allergens, increased serum IgE and eosinophilia. A number of genetic risks have recently been identified in the development of ABPA. These include HLA-DR and HLA-DQ, IL-4 receptor alpha chain (IL-4RA) polymorphisms, IL-10-1082GA promoter polymorphisms, surfactant protein A2 (SP-A2) polymorphisms, and cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene (CFTR) mutations. The studies indicate that ABPA patients are genetically at risk to develop skewed and heightened Th2 responses to A. fumigatus antigens. These genetic risk studies and their consequences of elevated biologic markers may aid in identifying asthmatic and CF patients who are at risk to the development of ABPA. Furthermore, these studies suggest that immune modulation with medications such as anti-IgE, anti-IL-4 and/or IL-13 monoclonal antibodies may be helpful in the treatment of ABPA.
Motor neuron diseases (MNDs) are an etiologically heterogeneous group of disorders of neurodegenerative origin, which result in degeneration of lower (LMNs) and/or upper motor neurons (UMNs). Neurodegenerative MNDs include pure hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP), which involves specific degeneration of UMNs, leading to progressive spasticity of the lower limbs. In contrast, spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) involves the specific degeneration of LMNs, with symmetrical muscle weakness and atrophy. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), the most common adult-onset MND, is characterized by the degeneration of both UMNs and LMNs, leading to progressive muscle weakness, atrophy, and spasticity. A review of the comparative neuroanatomy of the human and zebrafish motor systems showed that, while the zebrafish was a homologous model for LMN disorders, such as SMA, it was only partially relevant in the case of UMN disorders, due to the absence of corticospinal and rubrospinal tracts in its central nervous system. Even considering the limitation of this model to fully reproduce the human UMN disorders, zebrafish offer an excellent alternative vertebrate model for the molecular and genetic dissection of MND mechanisms. Its advantages include the conservation of genome and physiological processes and applicable in vivo tools, including easy imaging, loss or gain of function methods, behavioral tests to examine changes in motor activity, and the ease of simultaneous chemical/drug testing on large numbers of animals. This facilitates the assessment of the environmental origin of MNDs, alone or in combination with genetic traits and putative modifier genes. Positive hits obtained by phenotype-based small-molecule screening using zebrafish may potentially be effective drugs for treatment of human MNDs.
Neonatal hypotonia is a relatively common cause of consultation in daily pediatric practice. It is part of the clinical presentation of a large group of heterogeneous diseases, many of which have an important and classifiable genetic background. Identification of the specific disorder can help optimize the management and treatment of the patient and inform genetic counseling for the family, and therefore input from clinical geneticists is critical at the earliest stages of medical management. Here we present 30 patients with hypotonia of unknown etiology referred by a neuropediatrician to clinical genetics. Clinical, genetic, and molecular evaluation of each patient was performed. Sixty-nine percent of the patients included in the study had a genetic disease, including eight with Prader-Willi syndrome, three with spinal muscular atrophy, one with Rett syndrome, and one with Sotos syndrome harboring a previously undescribed mutation. Our data demonstrate that a multidisciplinary approach used from the outset that includes molecular analysis can help improve diagnosis and management of hypotonic infants.
At the post-transcriptional level, expression of protein-coding genes is controlled by a series of RNA regulatory events including nuclear processing of primary transcripts, transport of mature mRNAs to specific cellular compartments, translation and ultimately, turnover. These processes are orchestrated through the dynamic association of mRNAs with RNA binding proteins and ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes. Accurate formation of RNPs in vivo is fundamentally important to cellular development and function, and its impairment often leads to human disease. The survival motor neuron (SMN) protein is key to this biological paradigm: SMN is essential for the biogenesis of various RNPs that function in mRNA processing, and genetic mutations leading to SMN deficiency cause the neurodegenerative disease spinal muscular atrophy. Here we review the expanding role of SMN in the regulation of gene expression through its multiple functions in RNP assembly. We discuss advances in our understanding of SMN activity as a chaperone of RNPs and how disruption of SMN-dependent RNA pathways can cause motor neuron disease.
OBJECTIVES: Prospective cohort study to characterize the clinical features and course of spinal muscular atrophy type I (SMA-I).METHODS: Patients were enrolled at 3 study sites and followed for up to 36 months with serial clinical, motor function, laboratory, and electrophysiologic outcome assessments. Intervention was determined by published standard of care guidelines. Palliative care options were offered.RESULTS: Thirty-four of 54 eligible subjects with SMA-I (63%) enrolled and 50% of these completed at least 12 months of follow-up. The median age at reaching the combined endpoint of death or requiring at least 16 hours/day of ventilation support was 13.5 months (interquartile range 8.1-22.0 months). Requirement for nutritional support preceded that for ventilation support. The distribution of age at reaching the combined endpoint was similar for subjects with SMA-I who had symptom onset before 3 months and after 3 months of age (p=0.58). Having 2 SMN2 copies was associated with greater morbidity and mortality than having 3 copies. Baseline electrophysiologic measures indicated substantial motor neuron loss. By comparison, subjects with SMA-II who lost sitting ability (n=10) had higher motor function, motor unit number estimate and compound motor action potential, longer survival, and later age when feeding or ventilation support was required. The mean rate of decline in The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Infant Test for Neuromuscular Disorders motor function scale was 1.27 points/year (95% confidence interval 0.21-2.33, p=0.02).CONCLUSIONS: Infants with SMA-I can be effectively enrolled and retained in a 12-month natural history study until a majority reach the combined endpoint. These outcome data can be used for clinical trial design.© 2014 American Academy of Neurology.
microRNA is a subset of endogenous non-coding RNA. It binds to partially complementary sequences in mRNAs and inhibits mRNA translation by either blocking translational machinery or degrading mRNAs. It is involved in various cellular processes including cell cycle, development, metabolism, and synaptic plasticity. Dysregulation of miRNA expression and function is reported in various diseases including cancer, metabolic disorders as well as neurological disorders. In nervous system, miRNA related pathways play a very important role in development and function of neuronal cells. Moreover, numerous evidences suggest that dysregulated miRNA related pathways contribute to pathology of neurological disorders such as Alzheimer's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and spinal muscular atrophy (SMA). Here, we review current knowledge about the role of miRNAs in motor neuron disorders, especially about two common diseases: SMA and ALS.
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive genetic disease, which causes death of motor neurons in the anterior horn of the spinal cord. Genetic cause of SMA is the deletion or mutation of SMN1 gene, which encodes the SMN protein. Although SMA patients include SMN2 gene, a duplicate of SMN1 gene, predominant production of exon 7 skipped isoform from SMN2 pre-mRNA, fails to rescue SMA patients. Here we show that hnRNP M, a member of hnRNP protein family, when knocked down, promotes exon 7 skipping of both SMN2 and SMN1 pre-mRNA. By contrast, overexpression of hnRNP M promotes exon 7 inclusion of both SMN2 and SMN1 pre-mRNA. Significantly, hnRNP M promotes exon 7 inclusion in SMA patient cells. Thus, we conclude that hnRNP M promotes exon 7 inclusion of both SMN1 and SMN2 pre-mRNA. We also demonstrate that hnRNP M contacts an enhancer on exon 7, which was previously shown to provide binding site for tra2β. We present evidence that hnRNP M and tra2β contact overlapped sequence on exon 7 but with slightly different RNA sequence requirements. In addition, hnRNP M promotes U2AF65 recruitment on the flanking intron of exon 7. We conclude that hnRNP M promotes exon 7 inclusion of SMN1 and SMN2 pre-mRNA through targeting an enhancer on exon 7 through recruiting U2AF65. Our results provide a clue that hnRNP M is a potential therapeutic target for SMA.
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a genetically heterogeneous inherited human disorder displaying a pleotropic phenotype. Many of the symptoms characterized in the human disease have been reproduced in animal models carrying deletions or knock-in mutations of genes causal for the disorder. Thinning of the cerebral cortex, enlargement of the lateral and third ventricles, and structural changes in cilia are among the pathologies documented in these animal models. Ciliopathy is of particular interest in light of recent studies that have implicated primary neuronal cilia (PNC) in neuronal signal transduction. In the present investigation, we tested the hypothesis that areas of the brain responsible for learning and memory formation would differentially exhibit PNC abnormalities in animals carrying a deletion of the Bbs4 gene (Bbs4-/-). Immunohistochemical localization of adenylyl cyclase-III (ACIII), a marker restricted to PNC, revealed dramatic alterations in PNC morphology and a statistically significant reduction in number of immunopositive cilia in the hippocampus and amygdala of Bbs4-/- mice compared to wild type (WT) littermates. Western blot analysis confirmed the decrease of ACIII levels in the hippocampus and amygdala of Bbs4-/- mice, and electron microscopy demonstrated pathological alterations of PNC in the hippocampus and amygdala. Importantly, no neuronal loss was found within the subregions of amygdala and hippocampus sampled in Bbs4-/- mice and there were no statistically significant alterations of ACIII immunopositive cilia in other areas of the brain not known to contribute to the BBS phenotype. Considered with data documenting a role of cilia in signal transduction these findings support the conclusion that alterations in cilia structure or neurochemical phenotypes may contribute to the cognitive deficits observed in the Bbs4-/- mouse mode.
The Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS), which consists of polydactyly, obesity, mental retardation, pigmentary retinopathy and hypogonadism has been known since 1922, but due to the great similarity to the clinical manifestations of the Laurence-Moon syndrome (LMS) there is a considerable terminological confusion in the medical literature. An attempt is made at clarifying the problem. Four children from two families have been observed. There were inter- and intrafamilial variabilities of the expression and severity of the particular features, but retinopathy and structural and/or functional abnormalities were found in 100%. The combination of the two can serve as an easy clinical screening for diagnosis of the disease. Renal involvement is considered to be a cardinal feature of the syndrome. The most common and earliest symptoms are polydypso-polyuria and reduced concentrating ability, which may lead to some diagnostic difficulties, especially in infancy. Three children have end-stage renal disease and two of them are on maintenance haemodialysis, which they tolerate well.
Recurrent intradialytic hypotension, a complication of hemodialysis, is a consequence of an inadequate compensatory response or a paradoxic response to ultrafiltration-induced volume reduction. We report the use of midodrine, an alpha agonist, in an 18-year-old man with Bardet-Biedl syndrome and recurrent intradialytic hypotension. The clinical features of the intradialytic hypotensive spells are consistent with a paradoxic withdrawal of sympathetic activity, although an underlying abnormality in autonomic dysfunction cannot be excluded. Midodrine significantly increased the intradialytic blood pressure and decreased the intradialytic hypotensive episodes requiring intervention. The pharmacokinetic characteristics of the prodrug midodrine and the active metabolite de-glymidodrine in this patient with end-stage renal disease approximate those reported for patients with normal renal function. However, the prolonged terminal half-life for the active metabolite, de-glymidodrine, warrants careful administration in patients with renal failure.
Primary cilium dysfunction underlies the pathogenesis of Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS), a genetic disorder whose symptoms include obesity, retinal degeneration, and nephropathy. However, despite the identification of 12 BBS genes, the molecular basis of BBS remains elusive. Here we identify a complex composed of seven highly conserved BBS proteins. This complex, the BBSome, localizes to nonmembranous centriolar satellites in the cytoplasm but also to the membrane of the cilium. Interestingly, the BBSome is required for ciliogenesis but is dispensable for centriolar satellite function. This ciliogenic function is mediated in part by the Rab8 GDP/GTP exchange factor, which localizes to the basal body and contacts the BBSome. Strikingly, Rab8(GTP) enters the primary cilium and promotes extension of the ciliary membrane. Conversely, preventing Rab8(GTP) production blocks ciliation in cells and yields characteristic BBS phenotypes in zebrafish. Our data reveal that BBS may be caused by defects in vesicular transport to the cilium.
Bardet-Biedl syndrome is a genetically and clinically heterogeneous disorder caused by mutations in at least seven loci (BBS1-7), five of which are cloned (BBS1, BBS2, BBS4, BBS6, and BBS7). Genetic and mutational analyses have indicated that, in some families, a combination of three mutant alleles at two loci (triallelic inheritance) is necessary for pathogenesis. To date, four of the five known BBS loci have been implicated in this mode of oligogenic disease transmission. We present a comprehensive analysis of the spectrum, distribution, and involvement in non-Mendelian trait transmission of mutant alleles in BBS1, the most common BBS locus. Analyses of 259 independent families segregating a BBS phenotype indicate that BBS1 participates in complex inheritance and that, in different families, mutations in BBS1 can interact genetically with mutations at each of the other known BBS genes, as well as at unknown loci, to cause the phenotype. Consistent with this model, we identified homozygous M390R alleles, the most frequent BBS1 mutation, in asymptomatic individuals in two families. Moreover, our statistical analyses indicate that the prevalence of the M390R allele in the general population is consistent with an oligogenic rather than a recessive model of disease transmission. The distribution of BBS oligogenic alleles also indicates that all BBS loci might interact genetically with each other, but some genes, especially BBS2 and BBS6, are more likely to participate in triallelic inheritance, suggesting a variable ability of the BBS proteins to interact genetically with each other.
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a genetically heterogeneous developmental disorder whose molecular basis is largely unknown. Here, we show that mutations in the Caenorhabditis elegans bbs-7 and bbs-8 genes cause structural and functional defects in cilia. C. elegans BBS proteins localize predominantly at the base of cilia, and like proteins involved in intraflagellar transport (IFT), a process necessary for cilia biogenesis and maintenance, move bidirectionally along the ciliary axoneme. Importantly, we demonstrate that BBS-7 and BBS-8 are required for the normal localization/motility of the IFT proteins OSM-5/Polaris and CHE-11, and to a notably lesser extent, CHE-2. We propose that BBS proteins play important, selective roles in the assembly and/or function of IFT particle components. Our findings also suggest that some of the cardinal and secondary symptoms of BBS, such as obesity, diabetes, cardiomyopathy, and learning defects may result from cilia dysfunction.
Olfactory bulb (OB) volume evaluation by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has been demonstrated to be related to olfactory dysfunction in many different diseases. Olfactory dysfunction is often overlooked in Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) patients and is rarely objectively evaluated by MRI. We present a series of 20 BBS patients with olfactory dysfunction. The OB was evaluated separately and blindly by two radiologists (SR and SM) with 3 Tesla MRI imaging comparatively to 12 normal control subjects by global visual evaluation and by quantitative measurement of OB volume. In the 12 control cases OB visual evaluation was considered as normal in all cases for radiologist (SR) and in 10 cases for radiologist (SM). In the 20 BBS patients, OB visual evaluation was considered as abnormal in 18 cases for SR and in all cases for SM. OB volumetric evaluation for SR and SM in BBS patients was able to provide significant correlation between BBS and olfactory dysfunction. This study indicates that OB volume evaluation by MRI imaging like structural MRI scan for gray matter modifications demonstrates that olfactory dysfunction in BBS patients is a constant and cardinal symptom integrated in a genetical syndrome with peripheral and central olfactory structure alterations.
The renal phenotype in Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is highly variable. The present study describes renal findings in 41 BBS patients and analyzes the pathogenesis of hyposthenuria, the most common renal dysfunction. Five of 41 patients (12%) showed an estimated glomerular filtration rate < 60 ml·min-1·1.73 m-2 Urine protein and urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio were over 200 and 30 mg/g in 9/24 and 7/23 patients, respectively. Four of 41 patients showed no renal anomalies on ultrasound. Twenty of 34 patients had hyposthenuria in the absence of renal insufficiency. In all 8 of the hyposthenuric patients studied, dDAVP failed to elevate urine osmolality (Uosm), suggesting a nephrogenic origin. Interestingly, water loading (WL) did not result in a significant reduction of Uosm, indicating combined concentrating and diluting defects. dDAVP infusion induced a significant increase of plasma Factor VIII and von Willebrand Factor levels, supporting normal function of the type 2 vasopressin receptor at least in endothelial cells. While urinary aquaporin 2 (u-AQP2) abundance was not different between patients and controls at baseline, the dDAVP-induced increased u-AQP2 and the WL-induced reduction of u-AQP2 were blunted in patients with a combined concentrating and diluting defect, suggesting a potential role of AQP2 in the defective regulation of water absorption. Urine Uromodulin excretion was reduced in all hyposthenuric patients, suggesting a thick ascending limb defect. Interestingly, renal Na, Cl, Ca, but not K handling was impaired after acute WL but not at basal. In summary, BBS patients show combined urinary concentration and dilution defects; a thick ascending limb and collecting duct tubulopathy may underlie impaired water handling.
The identification of genomic variants in healthy and diseased individuals continues to rapidly outpace our ability to functionally annotate these variants. Techniques that both systematically assay the functional consequences of nucleotide-resolution variation and can scale to hundreds of genes are urgently required. We designed a sensitive yeast two-hybrid-based 'off switch' for positive selection of interaction-disruptive variants from complex genetic libraries. Combined with massively parallel programmed mutagenesis and a sequencing readout, this method enables systematic profiling of protein-interaction determinants at amino-acid resolution. We defined >1,000 interaction-disrupting amino acid mutations across eight subunits of the BBSome, the major human cilia protein complex associated with the pleiotropic genetic disorder Bardet-Biedl syndrome. These high-resolution interaction-perturbation profiles provide a framework for interpreting patient-derived mutations across the entire protein complex and thus highlight how the impact of disease variation on interactome networks can be systematically assessed.
Human monogenic obesity syndromes, including Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS), implicate neuronal primary cilia in regulation of energy homeostasis. Cilia in hypothalamic neurons have been hypothesized to sense and regulate systemic energy status, but the molecular mechanism of this signaling remains unknown. Here, we report a comprehensive localization screen of 42 G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCR) revealing seven ciliary GPCRs, including the neuropeptide Y (NPY) receptors NPY2R and NPY5R. We show that mice modeling BBS disease or obese tubby mice fail to localize NPY2R to cilia in the hypothalamus and that BBS mutant mice fail to activate c-fos or decrease food intake in response to the NPY2R ligand PYY3-36. We find that cells with ciliary NPY2R show augmented PYY3-36-dependent cAMP signaling. Our data demonstrate that ciliary targeting of NPY receptors is important for controlling energy balance in mammals, revealing a physiologically defined ligand-receptor pathway signaling within neuronal cilia.
Primary cilia are cellular appendages important for signal transduction and sensing the environment. Bardet-Biedl syndrome proteins form a complex that is important for several cytoskeleton-related processes such as ciliogenesis, cell migration and division. However, the mechanisms by which BBS proteins may regulate the cytoskeleton remain unclear. We discovered that Bbs4- and Bbs6-deficient renal medullary cells display a characteristic behaviour comprising poor migration, adhesion and division with an inability to form lamellipodial and filopodial extensions. Moreover, fewer mutant cells were ciliated [48% ± 6 for wild-type (WT) cells versus 23% ± 7 for Bbs4 null cells; P < 0.0001] and their cilia were shorter (2.55 μm ± 0.41 for WT cells versus 2.16 μm ± 0.23 for Bbs4 null cells; P < 0.0001). While the microtubular cytoskeleton and cortical actin were intact, actin stress fibre formation was severely disrupted, forming abnormal apical stress fibre aggregates. Furthermore, we observed over-abundant focal adhesions (FAs) in Bbs4-, Bbs6- and Bbs8-deficient cells. In view of these findings and the role of RhoA in regulation of actin filament polymerization, we showed that RhoA-GTP levels were highly upregulated in the absence of Bbs proteins. Upon treatment of Bbs4-deficient cells with chemical inhibitors of RhoA, we were able to restore the cilia length and number as well as the integrity of the actin cytoskeleton. Together these findings indicate that Bbs proteins play a central role in the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton and control the cilia length through alteration of RhoA levels.
Bardet-Biedl syndrome is a rare ciliopathy characterized by retinal dystrophy, obesity, intellectual disability, polydactyly, hypogonadism and renal impairment. Patients are at high risk of cardiovascular disease. Mutations in BBS1 and BBS10 account for more than half of those with molecular confirmation of the diagnosis. To elucidate genotype-phenotype correlations with respect to cardiovascular risk indicators 50 patients with mutations in BBS1 were compared with 19 patients harbouring BBS10 mutations. All patients had truncating, missense or compound missense/truncating mutations. The effect of genotype and mutation type was analysed. C-reactive protein was higher in those with mutations in BBS10 and homozygous truncating mutations (p = 0.013 and p = 0.002, respectively). Patients with mutations in BBS10 had higher levels of C peptide than those with mutations in BBS1 (p = 0.043). Triglyceride levels were significantly elevated in patients with homozygous truncating mutations (p = 0.048). Gamma glutamyl transferase was higher in patients with homozygous truncating mutations (p = 0.007) and heterozygous missense and truncating mutations (p = 0.002) than those with homozygous missense mutations. The results are compared with clinical cardiovascular risk factors. Patients with missense mutations in BBS1 have lower biochemical cardiovascular disease markers compared with patients with BBS10 and other BBS1 mutations. This could contribute to stratification of the clinical service.
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) represents a rare ciliopathy recessive autosomal inherited. The main clinical features are retinal dystrophy, postaxial polydactyly, obesity, different degrees of cognitive deficit, renal impairment, hypogonadism and genital malformations. The genetic explanation consists in BBS genes mutations, which encode modified proteins, altering the function of the immotile cilia. As a multitude of BBS genes mutations were described, the phenotypic aspect of these disorders varies according to that. We present the case of a 22 years old female patient, known with BBS since the age of 11 and which was diagnosed and operated for bilateral ovarian dermoid cysts, at the age of 21. We did not find a similar case in literature, regarding the association between the two disorders. We consider that our case points towards the importance of periodic imagistic evaluations [magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT) or ultrasound] of these patients, not only clinical and biological. Usually, the moment they are diagnosed with hypogonadism or genital malformations (in childhood or adolescence), the genital evaluation is neglected thereafter. We also consider that our therapeutic approach can be helpful in other similar clinical situations. Another important conclusion is represented by the importance of genetic counseling of the relatives of a BBS patient, unfortunately insufficiently provided in our region.
The prevalence of obesity in children is still rising all over the world. The most common reason for significant weight gain is a high-calorie diet and decreased physical activity. However, apart from environmental factors, genetic predisposition plays a crucial role in the pathomechanism of obesity. We present the case of a boy with pathological obesity and Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS). BBS is a ciliopathy, a heterogeneous group of rare disorders associated with defects in primary cilia. Other clinical signs and symptoms of BBS are: polydactyly, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism, intellectual disability, rod-cone dystrophy, genitourinary and renal abnormalities.CONCLUSIONS: genetic factors of rapid weight gain should be taken into consideration in a child with obesity. Polydactyly can be associated with ciliopathy. A patient with Bardet-Biedl syndrome requires multi-specialist care.
Laurence Moon Bardet Biedl Syndrome is a rare genetic disorder. Consanguineous marriage is usually the common cause. Principal features of Bardet Biedl Syndrome are red cone dystrophy, obesity, polydactyl, hypogonadism and renal anomalies. The diagnosis was overlooked in our patient until he came in our hospital. We here report an infrequent case of autosomal recessive disorder with Anaemia.
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a multisystemic developmental disorder diagnosed on the basis of the presence of obesity, retinal defects, polydactyly, hypogonadism, renal dysfunction, and learning disabilities. The syndrome is genetically heterogeneous with 14 BBS genes identified to date. Since the cloning of the first gene in 2000, a combination of genetic, in vitro, and in vivo studies have highlighted ciliary dysfunction as a primary cause of BBS pathology. Pleiotropy of ciliopathy phenotypes and complex genetic interactions between causal and modifying alleles of ciliary genes contribute to phenotypic variability. In particular, kidney disease in BBS is clinically heterogeneous, but is now recognized as a cardinal feature and a major cause of mortality in BBS.
Bardet-Biedl syndrome is a rare disease involving rode cone dystrophy, polydactyly, obesity, learning disabilities, hypogonadism and renal anomalies, symptoms caused by immotile cilia dysfunction. We report the first case of this syndrome in a teenager with an endonasal mass secondary to pyocele of a concha bullosa. The patient was treated successfully with endoscopic sinus surgery. Nasal obstruction secondary to a middle turbinate pyocele in Bardet-Biedl syndrome has not been described before. The pediatrician and the rhinologist should take this entity into consideration when investigating patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome and sinonasal symptoms.